This is Deborah Beale, and I am interviewing Dr.
Kenneth Hall, history of the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. The date is June 7, 1984.
OK. I'd first like to start with his little brief
biographical statement, education,
background. Hi. Yeah. I have a bachelor's at the
University of Tulsa, a master's at California
Berkeley, a PhD in Oklahoma. We have taught at the
University of Virginia here, a visiting prof in
Belgium at the University of Lubin, and wood
programical production research for Kempshire
Corporation. And you came here in 74? Yes. And how
did you come here? How did that happen?
I've been working for several years with
Professor Eubank in the chemical engineering
department. Through the corporation? No, when I
was at the University of Virginia. I had been
working with him on some joint research
interests. He asked if I'd come here and I said yes.
And how did you get involved with TEAS? You've got
to be involved with TEAS. You've got to do
research. So you started when you came with some
type of research with TEAS? Yeah, I brought
research grants and equipment. What type of
grants and equipment did you bring? I had an NSF
grant and a PRF grant and an ATA grant.
And
I brought the net apparatus
with me. Were they grants for thermodynamics?
Yep. And that's what you've been involved in all
this time? Yep. And how did you come about to become
director and center
now? All the same. I'm sorry. Director. Director.
Well, that's quite a
story. TRC had fallen on hard times financially.
And it got to the point where in 1975, I believe it
was, they had run into the red about
I believe it was something like $250,000 in the
Research Foundation. And the Research
Foundation has no mechanism for covering that
kind of entry. And so the only option was for TEAS to
purchase DRC from the Research Foundation for
$250,000 or whatever it was. So prior to 1975 it was
part of the Research Center? Yeah, it was in the
Chemistry Department and it was an organization
under the Research Center. So there was no TEAS? No
TEAS connection at all. But in 1975 TEAS purchased
it from the Research Foundation for the amount of
money it was in the red. For the next four or five
years, TRC proceeded to lose something on the
order of more than $100,000
a year.
In 1978, the director resigned, and I was put in
charge of trying to find a new director. And we
looked for a year for a new director and couldn't
find anybody that was willing to come take over an
organization that was losing $150,000 a year. And
so, as I remember it, one day Fred Benson called me
in and says, you've got it. Get it in the black. And
he shoved me out the door. So that's how I became
director. Sounds like the normal process. Yeah.
Has it gotten into the black since then? Yeah, we
made it to black the first year. With grants? With
grants and reorganizing finances. Well, I took
over in May, and for the year that ended in August, I
think it lost something like $90,000. The next
year we made... Something like 12,000. That's a
pretty good turnaround. And ever since then,
we've
always been in the black. We've never hit a red
deer. What is the particular, I've read lots of
things, but I'd like a brief explanation of what
the purpose of the center is. What we do is collect
out of the literature thermodynamic data on
organic compounds. And we evaluate these data and
toss out the bad data and then publish the best
critically evaluated data in the tables which are
all these books over here now though. The white
labeled ones are thermodynamic data, and the
colored labeled ones are spectroscopic data. So
we publish both kinds, although the
spectroscopic data is in a white thermodynamic
state
also. We also publish several other
compilations, but we do all
paperwork over here. And it's principally the
compilation and evaluation and publication of
data. Is that what the center's been doing ever
since it's been here? Yeah, the center's 42 years
old now. It started out at NBS in Washington. It
moved to Carnegie Mellon in about 52, I believe it
was. And in 61 it came here. Was it a particular
individual that moved it all these different
places? Well, sort of. Fred Rossini started it out
at NBS in Washington, and he moved it to Carnegie
Mellon. When he left Carnegie Mellon, he was going
to be dean at Notre Dame, and he wasn't going to have
time for the center anymore, so he split the center
into two parts. He gave one part to Dr. Swalinski,
which is the part that came here, and one part to Dr.
which went to Purdue. And the one at Purdue does
transport properties and we do thermonautic
properties.
But it's been doing principally the same type of
thing since it began. Same type of work for 47 years
now, yeah. I see that when most people in the world
think about Texas A&M, they probably think about
TRC. All those little dots are where we have
subscribers to our publications. We pretty much
cover Western Europe and Japan. That's a paid
subscription, right? Yeah. I read one of the
pamphlets that Tease puts out on the Center, and
they said that you were trying to get more research
money, or research-oriented versus
sales-oriented. Is that the sales part, the
selling of subscription? On the other hand,
that's the PR for the university. So...
It's a valuable function. What I want to see happen
over here is that we become more of an academic
research organization, yes, in that the research
personnel here would be writing research
proposals, doing research projects, and we would
also be doing the tables here, because the tables
are extremely valuable for the scientific and
technical community in the world. And this would
be fallback. one guy's grants going down a year,
why didn't they pick it up on sales? Does the
National Bureau of Standards finance any of this?
Yes.
They're currently our biggest research sponsor.
Have they been sponsoring you all along somewhat?
No, they started in about
It was around 75 also when they
started supporting the center. Yeah, it was 75. 75
is when API stopped supporting it. This project
was originally API project 44. And it was that
project from 1940.
From about 1942 until 1966
it was API Research Project 44. In 66, 44
terminated and API continued to subsidize the
project until 75 and then stopped subsidizing.
Originally these data were all gratis.
In terms of organization and administration, was
it easier once you were in T's to cut back on money? I
mean, do you think that made it easier when you
reorganized to cut back on administrative costs?
Oh, no. No? No. It didn't really make any
difference. Have you noticed a difference in your
job at all with the changes in administration,
either at the system level, the university level,
or the TEAS level? Sure. Now, who has changed
your... Whoever it is that starts pouring out the
paperwork. Is the paperwork that changes it?
Yeah.
Has there been any... change in attitude towards
the Senate in terms of support or ignoring
it? There was a big change in attitude when we got to
black. The center is completely
self-supporting. We get in $60,000 a year from
TEAS in September and we give back $60,000 a year in
August.
TEAS has helped us out considerably the last two
years because we desperately needed a computer.
And so they said for the two years, which are ending
in this August, that rather than give back the
$60,000, we can just use that towards getting a
computer. One of your own, or access to one? So, at
the end of this year, we expect to break just
exactly even, but we will have taken $120,000 in
state money and computerized ourselves.
However, we've got an excellent computer system
right now, probably a better one than anybody else
in the university has. We have a much more modern
system, and we're able to do things that really no
other department in the
campus can do. So in your attitude, the low point of
the center was when it was in the red. The low point
of the center was when I took it over. when you were
given the opportunity to get in the black or else.
And is there a particular project besides the
measurement in terms of research that the center
has undertaken in a particular crowd? We're not
doing the measurement. All the thermodynamic
measurements, all the experimental work, we do it
a couple of days a day. And there we have Drs.
Eubank, Holstie, and myself. And Dr. Marsh, who's
joined us as associate director here, is also
doing experimental work. He does that all over
again in our experimental department. So you're
just doing collection of data here? Right.
Compilation. Now, of course, there is research
involved with that also. It's not just... It's
verification research? No. coming up with new
ways to estimate properties of molecules which
aren't on the data and things like this. So you're
not just taking what everyone else has done? No,
you don't just take what they did and put it in the
page and run it back down. So that brings me to one of
the major questions I wanted to ask. What is the
difference between this center as a center in the
different departmental divisions of TUES, like
the CHEME division of TUES?
There's no academic ones. We're just like the
Nuclear Science Center or the Center for
Strategic Technology or something. There's no
academic connections, except myself. I'm also a
professor of chemical engineering. Do you employ
graduate students at all here? Sometimes.
Sometimes undergraduate students. Right now we
have three or four undergraduates employed.
Well, actually, yeah, we have one graduate
student employed right now, too. That's all you
have to do with the academics? Using some of them to
research? Sort of. We also provide a great deal of
service for the experimental group. But in terms
of academically, that's the only contact you
have? And then the academic center is more of the,
the
division is the research division that does
the chemical properties research. Experimental
work.
Yeah, experimental work is done through the
chemical engineering division. Mainly because
Dr. Solstein, you might have had an opportunity at
TRC. Well, of course it gets a little mixed up too.
Is there a function you think you would like your
center to have that it doesn't have? A function?
What would be best is if we could collect all the
thermonautics work under one mat.
preferably in one location, so that we can have the
experimental work and the theoretical work that
we do here all in one location where there can be a
lot more exchange between people. You're not
talking about administratively as much as you are
physical? No, physically. It doesn't matter
whether it's under the head of chemical
engineering or under the director of TRC, but it
would just be better for everyone involved if we
were all in one location. Has that been talked
about at all? Administratively, I don't think the
Department of Chemical Engineering wants to have
anything else to do with this place. He was trying
to ride herd on it from 75 to 79. While you were
trying to find somebody? While we were trying to
find somebody to run it, yeah. And it's, there is a
considerable amount of administrative work to be
done here. And, of course, Chem-E is even a bigger
mess.
You've got to have a real empire building to want to
take this on in addition. Dr. Holland doesn't
especially care for this room. Has there been any
talk about moving them into the same physical
facilities? I've talked about it for years, man.
Every time I talk to the spacemen around here, they
talk about moving them farther apart.
Basically, every time we've gone to the
university for help with space, We've worked in
the opposite direction of
what we should have been able to do. Do you have no
possibilities of moving into the new center? No.
We were supposed to move into the new center. What
happened there? We were told we weren't going to
move into the new center about two or three months
before people started moving.
Is there any problems? We asked to go into the old
English annex over here. This building was
falling down up on the street. Well, they decided
if we wanted it, it must be good, so they'd keep it.
Nobody's in there yet. That was two or three years
ago now. Is that closer to the community? No. It's
just a bigger space. We could have all gotten into
one. See, we're on two different floors of this
building, which causes problems. So they've got
kind of stuck in cubby holes. Yeah. Basically, the
spacemen decided that maybe somewhere around
1990, we might be able to move into the... USDA
building. That's way over on the other side of the
campus. Yeah, it's farther away from the
experimental work yet, like I said. Has the center
involved any interdisciplinary cooperation? Or
is it all chemistry? Oh, we cooperate with
chemistry, too. Have you involved the Data
Processing Center or the Computer Science Center
in any computer acquisitions? No. That's who
we want to get away from. We will be cutting off,
we'll be cutting the lines of the Omdahl sometime
in the next year.
Just being kind of universal. And have any
external events, state and national, created
increased interest in your center? Sure. But are
there particular ones you can think of? Yeah, the
economic recovery. And
something was starting before the
recession, and that is an awareness that, well,
what started before the recession was the huge
increase in oil prices, of course, and the
awareness of energy resources. To do anything
with energy resources, you have to know what the
thermodynamic properties are. Therefore, since
we were doing, we're the only center in the world
essentially doing this kind of work, putting out
all the thermodynamic properties that we're
getting to come up with. That was starting to have a
big impact. Then, of course, the recession caused
a lot of people to drop subscriptions because our
costs kept going up while the recession kept going
on. Now that the recession's about over, there's
more interest in the product again. But there's
something else that's starting to get into the
wind, and that is that the chemical and petroleum
industry is perceived as a smokestack industry,
which it can't afford to be. I
think that's something that's going to change
rapidly in the next five to ten years. The
particular industry is not going to be content to
sit back
in that position. It will be wanting to move much
more into what people perceive as high-tech. Now,
when you say high-tech right now, everybody
thinks, well, you're either talking about
microelectronics or genetic engineering. What
are you talking about when you say that? I'm
talking about high technology. What's the
difference between high technology and regular
technology? High technology is where you do a
great deal of research and you utilize the
benefits of that research or utilize the results
of that research to benefit an entire program or
entire industry or society as a whole. All the
years that
the people in electrical engineering, let's just
pick as an example, were sitting there with not
much to do except research, like the past 20 years.
So they sat there and they did research and did
research and they had a big spur from the military
and from NASA. But really all they were doing was
research for 20 years. them all of a sudden, boom,
it becomes possible to take advantage of all this
research. And the electronics industry just came
roaring out of the last recession. In fact, it
hardly dipped when it went into it. For the past 20
years, the petroleum and chemical industry has
primarily been interested in extracting the
maximum possible profit out of it. I'm not saying
that in the way the idiots in Washington say it. But
it's just that They were much less concerned with
doing research than they were with providing the
goods that people wanted and getting back money
from it and diversifying. They were spending the
same time. They realized that the oil was going to
start declining in abundance in the United
States, and they were diversifying at the same
time. So they were pouring profits back in, but
they were pouring back in the diversification.
But at the same time, they completely neglected
research. They didn't completely neglect it, but
on the scale of things, they completely neglected
research for 20 years. Now all of a sudden, they're
a smokestack industry, and they're having a hard
time coming out of the recession. This is probably
the largest reason. So are they providing a lot of
funds for research yet? Nope. You think they'll
move that direction? Yes.
Is that one of the ways TEAS can help you? Is it
chemical research? No, TEAS can't help at all.
TEAS can't help at all? TEAS doesn't believe there
is chemical petroleum in Texas. TEAS only
believes there is microelectronics in Texas. You
think they've become myopic?
Yeah. They're overlooking the... It's a major
value-added industry in the state. It always has
been and it's very likely to continue to be for the
next 20 to 30 years. And Matisse just doesn't seem
to have any interest in assisting this particular
industry. Has that attitude changed? No. It's
grown. Ever since you've been here? Sort of a
benign and black situation.
There's a massive lack of understanding of the
fact that this particular... Well, let's put it
this way. The industry has always given the
impression that it doesn't need anybody because
it's a giant. We're sitting here with, I forget how
many billion dollars a year it pumps into the
economy of the state, but it's something like 40 to
45% of the economy of the state comes from the
chemical and petroleum industry.
And you tend to think, well, they just don't need
anything. And the industry itself gives the
impression they don't need anything. Well, the
industry is in desperate need right now, and it's
slowly beginning to perceive that it needs
something right now. I think that it should be one
of the functions of TEAS to look for situations
like this and be ready to move in. The biggest
problem, I think, we've had at this university,
not just with TEAS, but the university as a whole,
is it's always running around after something.
Instead of running out in front with something.
Anticipation. Yeah, we never anticipate
anything. We say, oh my God, genetic engineering
is a big thing. Well, it started, what, five years
ago. Oh, we better get into genetic engineering.
It really looks like it's finally going
somewhere.
Texas A&M never wants to take a flyer. They always
want to be absolutely sure that, yes, this is a
profitable product. and we'll wait until we're
absolutely sure it's a problem, then we'll go down
that path, and then you miss the wave.
In terms of... In your particular center, I know
you don't think your impact is limited to just A&M
or Texas. Do you think it's statewide? We have no
impact on A&M whatsoever, but our impact
worldwide is considerable. If we were to shut
down, there would be howls and cracks around the
world because they would not be able to get this
information in. Is there anything else you'd like
to tell me? Anything about the Center I haven't
covered in questions you'd like to tell me? And
it's relationship to TEAS. It's been a
comfortable relationship with TEAS. TEAS has
finally gotten comfortable with the Center since
we don't really cost them anything.
I don't think Tease yet perceives the impact the
center has on the reputation.
Do you think they have a tendency to go after the
high gloss stuff?
Yeah. Yeah, maybe a little bit more than they
should right now.
There
are always flashy, sexy things roaring around.
But like I say, if you try to jump on those
bandwagons, you usually miss them. If you're the
guy that comes out and invents the flashy, sexy
thing and you go to me, you're riding the wave all
the way
in. I think T's have been trying to do that sort of
thing. I think they've come up with some. some
ideas along those lines. Unfortunately, I think
that,
in my opinion, some of them have been dissipated.
Yes, they are trying to lead in an area, and it may be
a function that T should be performing. It's not
necessarily good in terms of anything.
What's good for TEAS is not necessarily good for
A&M. That's right. A&M University or A&M System,
it's not good. A&M System. TEAS is a state agency
and it has a broader charter than just a function
for Texas A&M System.
And some of the functions that they've entered
into, I think, satisfied their charter very well,
but unfortunately don't do much for Texas A&M
System.
And you say, well, so what? That's their charter.
Well, 80% of the T's budget comes from the A&M
System. It comes from people getting research
contracts. T's state budget is something around
$5 million. is what they get from the state. The
budget they operate on is 25 to 30 million. All but
the 5 million comes from Texas
A&M. So it's
true that they have a broader charter than to have
just operate in the best interest of Texas A&M, but
it's also true that without Texas A&M they'd be a
mighty little burp
somewhere. Is there anything else you'd
like to add? I just think that, yeah, maybe. Tees
has gotten a lot of bad press lately, I think. Well,
it's always had a lot of bad press. And it isn't
necessarily deserved. The problem is, of course,
there's only a finite amount of money. And they
have to manage it, and Tees has to manage that money
in a way that the people at Tees think best and think
would be most productive for most people. And as a
result, they of course catch a lot of static from
people that think that their particular program
is the most important one in the world. Why don't
you give me all the
money? But I think overall, the TEAS has done a
remarkably good job of supporting the functions
that it deals with.
I think certainly that in the School of
Engineering,
if you took a step back and looked at things,
Teaswood has provided much better support for the
School of Engineering than the University
has. And I think a lot of people around the
University tend to forget that.
Because I think T's is my old professor
sometimes. So they're trying to get beyond
myopia, but they're still human? Sure. No, it's
hard. It's easy to sit back and criticize
anything. There's a lot of good stuff that goes on
with T's, too. And it provides a lot of flexibility
to do things that you couldn't do otherwise. I
don't think we could have ever, well, we might have
been able to work out a deal somehow other than
purchase a computer over a period of two years, but
it was a lot easier to do it with Deezer.
And I appreciate that. It made my life a little
easier. Anybody that can do that, well, that's
fine with me. Isn't that what they're for, is to try
and make the researcher's life a little easier?
Uh,
yes, I think you can find very few researchers that
would look at it that way. What do most researchers
think they're for? I don't think there's a clear
perception of what they're for by most
researchers, especially the younger guys. All
they see them doing is sucking up the older guys.
They don't really, especially the younger guys
don't see, they don't see anything coming back.
It's coming back to them, they don't understand
it.
I think that probably the most constructive
criticism I could offer to T's, and I've been doing
this for years, and they pay attention to me, is
that they spend a great deal of time, effort, and
money advertising teas to everyone outside the
university, and they ought to spend a little time
and effort and money advertising teas within the
university. They used to assume everybody knows
what they do and why they're doing it. Like I say,
maybe a few of the senior professors and guys who
have been in research for a long time around here
know what teas is doing and why they're doing it,
but certainly the younger guys have no idea, no
appreciation for what teas is doing. that's for
them. Now T's may not do something directly for
them, but they're getting a lot of benefit from
some of the stuff that T's is doing. They just can't
see that. That's why I say if T's spent a little time
trying to educate the people here, they might...
There'd probably be a lot less bitching and
grousing going on. Well, I think that would help me
out a lot. There is this unit. going around campus
now which is kind of an interesting unit which
shows a little bit about why i said the last thing
that's tad tad is a t's assistant director
what's the unit going that's a unit it's a unit of uh
that you can use in various ways it's a unit of money
it's a unit of paperwork generated It used to be the
T's had a director and an associate director. The
T's now has a director and associate director and
five and a half assistant directors. So that's how
the TAD came
into being. You think that's given them some bad
press on campus? Yes. The administration top
heavy charges? Yes. And whenever people are
scratching and fighting and clawing for square
inches of research space, you usually don't go
build yourself a palace.
That's the other big boner move they made
recently.
Unless you can bring everybody else in with you.
Unless you can provide all the research space that
people desperately need, you don't... I have 300
square foot offices sitting around with
one person in the middle of them. I appreciate all
the time.